The Warden of the Tomb
Small workroom, high window, beyond it a bare treetop. PRINCE (at writing table,
leaning back in chair, looking out of window). CHAMBERLAIN (white beard,
youthfully squeezed into tight jacket, standing against wall near center door).
Pause.
 PRINCE (turning from window): Well?
 CHAMBERLAIN: I cannot recommend it, your Highness.
 PRINCE: Why?
 CHAMBERLAIN: I can't quite formulate my objections at the moment. I'm
expressing only a fraction of what's on my mind when I quote the universal saying: Let
the dead rest in peace.
 PRINCE: That's my opinion, too.
 CHAMBERLAIN: In that case I haven't properly understood.
 PRINCE: So it seems.
Page 229
Pause.
 PRINCE: Perhaps the only thing that disconcerts you is that instead of going
ahead with the arrangement, I announced it to you first.
 CHAMBERLAIN: The announcement certainly burdens me with a great
responsibility which I must endeavor to live up to.
 PRINCE: Don't speak of responsibility!
Pause.
 PRINCE: Let's see. Hitherto the tomb in the Friedrichspark has been guarded
by a warden who lives in a lodge at the park's entrance. Was there anything wrong
with this?
 CHAMBERLAIN: Certainly not. The tomb is more than four hundred years
old and has always been guarded in this way.
 PRINCE: It could be an abuse. But it isn't an abuse, is it?
 CHAMBERLAIN: It is a necessary arrangement.
 PRINCE: All right then, a necessary arrangement. I've been here in the castle
quite some time now, have gained some insight into details which hitherto have been
entrusted to strangers -- they manage fairly well -- and I've come to this conclusion:
the Warden up there in the park is not enough. There must also be a guard down in
the tomb. It probably won't be a pleasant job. But experience has proved that willing
and suitable people can be found for any job.
 CHAMBERLAIN: Needless to say, any orders issued by your Highness will be
carried out, even if the necessity of the order is not fully understood.
Page 230
 PRINCE (starting up): Necessity! Do you mean to say that a guard at the park
gate is necessary? The Friedrichspark belongs to the castle park, is entirely surrounded
by it. The castle park itself is amply guarded -- by the army, what's more. So why a
special guard for the Friedrichspark? Isn't this a mere formality? A pleasant deathbed
for the wretched old man who is keeping watch there?
 CHAMBERLAIN: Formality it is, but a necessary one. A demonstration of
reverence for the illustrious dead.
 PRINCE: And what about the guard in the tomb itself?
 CHAMBERLAIN: In my opinion this would have a police connotation. It
would mean a real guarding of unreal things beyond the human sphere.
 PRINCE: For my family this tomb represents the frontier between the Human
and the Other, and it's on this frontier that I wish to post a guard. As for the police
connotation, as you call it, we can question the Warden himself. I've sent for him.
(Rings a bell.)
 CHAMBERLAIN: He's a confused old man, if I may say so, already quite out of
hand.
 PRINCE: If that's so, all the more reason for strengthening the guard in the way
I've suggested.
(Enter servant.)
 PRINCE: The Warden of the tomb!
(Servant leads in Warden, holding him tight around the waist to prevent him
from collapsing. Ancient red livery hanging loosely about Warden, brightly polished
Page 231
silver buttons, several decorations. Cap in hand, he trembles under the gentlemen's
gaze.)
 PRINCE: Put him on the divan!
(Servant lays him down and goes off. Pause. A faint rattling in Warden's throat.)
 PRINCE (again in armchair): Can you hear?
 WARDEN (tries to answer but fails, is too exhausted, sinks back again).
 PRINCE: Try to pull yourself together. We're waiting.
 CHAMBERLAIN (leaning over Prince): What could this man give information
about? And credible and important information at that? He ought to be taken straight
to bed.
 WARDEN: Not to bed -- still strong -- fairly -- can still hold my end up.
 PRINCE: So you should. You've only just turned sixty. Granted, you look very
weak.
 WARDEN: I'll pick up in no time -- feel better in a minute.
 PRINCE: It wasn't meant as a reproach. I'm only sorry you aren't feeling well.
Have you anything to complain about?
 WARDEN: Hard work -- hard work -- not complaining -- but very weak --
wrestling bouts every night.
 PRINCE: What d'you say?
Page 232
 WARDEN: Hard work.
 PRINCE: You said something else.
 WARDEN: Wrestling bouts.
 PRINCE: Wrestling bouts? What kind of wrestling bouts?
 WARDEN: With the blessed ancestors.
 PRINCE: I don't understand. D'you have bad dreams?
 WARDEN: No dreams -- don't sleep.
 PRINCE: Then let's hear about these -- these wrestling bouts.
 WARDEN (remains silent).
 PRINCE (to Chamberlain): Why doesn't he speak?
 CHAMBERLAIN (hurrying to Warden): He may die any minute.
 PRINCE (stands up).
WARDEN (as Chamberlain touches him): Don't, don't, don't! (Fights off
Chamberlain's hands, then collapses in tears.)
PRINCE: We're tormenting him.
 CHAMBERLAIN: How?
 PRINCE: I don't know.
Page 233
 CHAMBERLAIN: Coming to the castle, having to present himself here, the
sight of your Highness, this questioning -- he no longer has the wits to face all this.
 PRINCE (still staring at the Warden): That's not it. (Goes to divan, bends over
Warden, takes his little skull in his hands.) Mustn't cry. What are you crying for? We
wish you well. I realize your job isn't easy. You've certainly deserved well of my family.
So stop crying and tell us all about it.
 WARDEN: But I'm so afraid of that gentleman there -- (Looks at Chamberlain,
more threateningly than afraid.)
PRINCE (to Chamberlain): If we want him to talk I'm afraid you'll have to leave.
 CHAMBERLAIN: But look, your Highness, he's foaming at the mouth. He's
seriously ill.
 PRINCE (absent-mindedly): Please go, it won't take long.
Exit Chamberlain.
Prince sits on edge of divan.
Pause.
 PRINCE: Why were you afraid of him?
 WARDEN (surprisingly composed): I wasn't afraid. Me afraid of a servant?
 PRINCE: He's not a servant. He's a Count, free and rich.
 WARDEN: A servant all the same, you are the master.
Page 234
 PRINCE: If you like it that way. But you said yourself that you were afraid of
him.
 WARDEN: I didn't want to say things in front of him which are meant only for
you. Haven't I already said too much in front of him?
 PRINCE: So we're on terms of intimacy, and yet today is the first time I've seen
you.
 WARDEN: Seen for the first time, but you've always known that I (raising his
forefinger) hold the most important position at Court. You even acknowledged it
publicly by awarding me the medal "Red-as-Fire." Here! (Holds up the medal on his
coat.)
 PRINCE: No, that's the medal for twenty-five years' service at Court. My
grandfather gave you that. But I'll decorate you, too.
 WARDEN: Do as you please and grant me whatever you think I deserve. I've
acted as your tomb Warden for thirty years.
 PRINCE: Not mine. My reign has lasted hardly a year.
 WARDEN (lost in thought): Thirty years.
Pause.
WARDEN (remembering only half of the Prince's remark): Nights last years
there.
 PRINCE: I haven't yet had a report from your office. What's your work like?
 WARDEN: Every night the same. Every night till the heart beats as if it were
Page 235
about to burst.
 PRINCE: Is it only night duty, then? Night duty for an old man like you?
 WARDEN: That's just it, your Highness. It's day duty. A loafer's job. There one
sits, at the front door, with one's mouth open in the sunshine. Sometimes the
watchdog pats one on the knee with its paws, and then lies down again. That's all that
ever happens.
 PRINCE: Well?
 WARDEN (nodding): But it has been changed to night duty.
 PRINCE: By whom?
 WARDEN: By the lords of the tomb.
 PRINCE: You know them?
 WARDEN: Yes.
 PRINCE: They come to see you?
 WARDEN: Yes.
 PRINCE: Last night, too?
 WARDEN: Last night, too.
 PRINCE: What was it like?
 WARDEN (sitting up straight): Same as usual.
Page 236
Prince stands up.
 WARDEN: Same as usual. Quiet till midnight. I'm lying in bed -- excuse me --
smoking my pipe. My granddaughter is asleep in the next bed. At midnight comes the
first knock at the window. I look at the clock. Always to the minute. Two more knocks,
they mingle with the striking of the tower clock, but I can still hear them. These are no
human knuckles. But I know all that and don't budge. Then it clears its throat outside,
it's surprised that in spite of all that knocking I haven't opened the window. Let his
princely Highness be surprised! The old Warden is still there! (Shows his fist.)
 PRINCE: You're threatening me?
 WARDEN (doesn't immediately understand): Not you. The one at the window!
 PRINCE: Who is it?
 WARDEN: He shows himself at once. All of a sudden window and shutters are
opened. I just have time to throw the blanket over my grandchild's face. The storm
blows in, promptly puts the light out. Duke Friedrich! His face with beard and hair
completely fills my poor window. How he has grown throughout the centuries! When
he opens his mouth to speak the wind blows his old beard between his teeth and he
bites on it.
 PRINCE: Just a moment. You say Duke Friedrich? Which Friedrich?
 WARDEN: Duke Friedrich, just Duke Friedrich.
 PRINCE: Is that the name he gives?
 WARDEN (anxiously): No, he doesn't give it.
 PRINCE: And yet you know -- (breaking off) -- Go on!
Page 237
 WARDEN: Shall I go on?
 PRINCE: Of course. All this very much concerns me. There must be an error in
the distribution of labor. You're overworked.
 WARDEN (kneeling): Don't take my job away, your Highness. Having lived for
you all these years, let me also die for you! Don't wall up the grave I'm struggling
toward. I serve willingly and am still strong enough to serve. To be granted an
audience like today's, to take a rest with my master -- this gives me strength for ten
years.
 PRINCE (putting Warden back on divan): No one's going to take your job from
you. How could I get along without your experience? But I'll appoint another Warden,
then you'll become Head Warden.
 WARDEN: Am I not good enough? Have I ever let anyone pass?
 PRINCE: Into the Friedrichspark?
 WARDEN: No, out of the park. Who'd want to come in? If ever anyone stops at
the railing I beckon to him from the window and he runs away. But out! Everyone
wants to get out. After midnight you can see all the voices from the grave assembled
around my house. I think it's only because they are so closely packed together that the
whole lot of them don't burst through my narrow window. If it gets too bad, however,
I grab the lantern from under my bed, swing it high, and with laughter and moaning
these incredible creatures scatter in all directions. Then I can hear them rustling even
in the farthest bush at the end of the park. But they soon gather together again.
 PRINCE: And do they tell you what they want?
 WARDEN: First they give orders. Especially Duke Friedrich. No living being
Page 238
could be so confident. Every night for thirty years he has been expecting me to give in.
 PRINCE: If he has been coming for thirty years it can't be Duke Friedrich, for
he has been dead only fifteen years. On the other hand, he is the only one of that name
in the tomb.
 WARDEN (too carried away by his story}: That I don't know, your Highness, I
never went to school. I only know how he begins. "Old dog," he begins at the window,
"the gentlemen are knocking and you just stay in your filthy bed." They have a
particular grudge against beds, by the way. And now every night we have the same
conversation, he outside, I opposite him, my back to the door. I say: "I'm only on day
duty." The Duke turns and shouts into the park: "He's only on day duty." Whereupon
all the assembled aristocracy burst out laughing. Then the Duke says to me again: "But
it is day." I say curtly: "You're wrong." The Duke: "Night or day, open the door." I:
"That's against my orders." And with my pipe I point at a notice on the door. The
Duke: "But you're our Warden." I: "Your Warden, but employed by the reigning
Prince." He: "Our Warden, that's the main thing. So open up, and be quick about it." I:
"No." He: "Idiot, you'll lose your job. Prince Leo has invited us for today."
 PRINCE (quickly): I?
 WARDEN: You.
Pause.
 WARDEN: When I hear your name I lose my firmness. That's why I have
always taken care to lean against the door which is almost the only thing that holds me
up. Outside, everyone's singing your name. "Where's the invitation?" I ask weakly.
"Bedbug!" he shouts, "you doubt my ducal word?" I say: "I have no orders, so I won't
open, I won't open, I won't open!" -- "He won't open!" shouts the Duke outside. "So
come on, all of you, the whole dynasty! At the door! We'll open it ourselves." And a
Page 239
moment later there's nothing under my window.
Pause.
 PRINCE: Is that all?
 WARDEN: All? My real service begins only now. I rush out of the door, around
the house, and promptly run into the Duke and there we are, locked in combat. He so
big, I so small, he so broad, I so thin, I can fight only with his feet, but now and again
he lifts me up in the air and then I fight up there, too. All his comrades stand around
in a circle and make fun of me. One, for instance, cuts open my trousers behind and
they all play with the tail of my shirt while I'm fighting. Can't understand why they
laugh, as until now I've always won.
 PRINCE: How is it possible for you to win? Have you any weapons?
 WARDEN: I carried weapons only during the first years. What good could they
be against him? They only hampered me. We just fight with our fists, or rather with
the strength of our breath. And you're in my thoughts all the time.
Pause.
 WARDEN: But I never doubt my victory. Only sometimes I'm afraid the Duke
will let me slip through his fingers and forget that he's fighting.
 PRINCE: And when do you win?
 WARDEN: At dawn. Then he throws me down and spits at me. That's his
confession of defeat. But I have to go on lying there for an hour before I can get my
breath back properly.
Pause.
Page 240
 PRINCE (standing up): But tell me, don't you know what they really want?
 WARDEN: To get out of the park.
 PRINCE: But why?
 WARDEN: That I don't know.
 PRINCE: Haven't you asked?
 WARDEN: No.
 PRINCE: Why not?
 WARDEN: It would embarrass me. But if you wish, I'll ask them today.
 PRINCE (shocked, loud): Today!
 WARDEN (knowingly): Yes, today.
 PRINCE: And you can't even guess what they want?
 WARDEN (thoughtfully): No.
Pause.
 WARDEN: Perhaps I ought to add that sometimes in the early mornings while
I'm lying there trying to get my breath and even too weak to open my eyes, there
comes a delicate, moist creature, rather hairy to the touch, a latecomer, the Countess
Isabella. She runs her hand all over me, catches hold of my beard, her whole body
glides along my neck, under my chin, and she's in the habit of saying: "Not the others,
but me -- let me out." I shake my head as much as I can. "I want to go to Prince Leo, to
Page 241
offer him my hand." I keep on shaking my head. "But me, me!" I can still hear her
crying, then she's gone. And my granddaughter appears with blankets, wraps me up in
them, and waits with me till I can walk on my own. An exceptionally good girl.
 PRINCE: Isabella? The name's unknown to me.
Pause.
 PRINCE: To offer me her hand! (Goes to window, looks out.)
 Enter servant through center door.
 SERVANT: Her Highness, m'lady the Princess, awaits you.
 PRINCE (looks absent-mindedly at servant. Turns to Warden): Wait till I come
back. (Exit left.)
Chamberlain enters at once through center door, then the Lord High Steward
(youngish man in officer's uniform) through door on right.
 WARDEN (ducks behind divan and flourishes his hands as though seeing
ghosts).
 STEWARD: The Prince has gone?
 CHAMBERLAIN: Following your advice, the Princess sent for him.
 STEWARD: Good. (Turns suddenly, bends over behind divan.) And you,
miserable ghost, you actually dare to appear here in the princely castle! Aren't you
afraid of the great boot that'll kick you through the door?
 WARDEN: I'm -- I'm --
Page 242
 STEWARD: Quiet, first of all keep quiet, don't utter -- and sit down here in this
corner! (To Chamberlain) I thank you for informing me about the latest princely
whim.
 CHAMBERLAIN: You inquired about it.
 STEWARD: Even so. And now a confidential word. Purposely in front of that
creature there. You, Count, are flirting with the opposition.
 CHAMBERLAIN: Is that an accusation?
 STEWARD: An apprehension, so far.
 CHAMBERLAIN: In that case I can answer. I'm not flirting with the
opposition, for I don't know it. I can feel the currents, but I steer clear of them. I still
represent the open policy that prevailed under Duke Friedrich. At that time the only
policy at Court was to serve the Prince. This was made easier by his being a bachelor,
but it should never be difficult.
 STEWARD: Very sensible -- except that one's own nose, however reliable,
never points the right way all the time. This can only be achieved by reason. But
reason must make decisions. Let's assume the Prince is on the wrong track: does one
serve him better by following him down or, with all due respect, by chasing him back?
Undoubtedly by chasing him back.
 CHAMBERLAIN: You came here with the Princess from a foreign Court, have
spent a mere six months here, and you already think you can tell the difference
between good and evil in the complicated conditions of this Court?
 STEWARD: He who blinks sees only complications. He who keeps his eyes
open sees the eternal truth in the first hours as clearly as after a hundred years.
Page 243
Admittedly, in this case, a sad truth which in the next few days, however, may take a
decisive turn for the better.
 CHAMBERLAIN: I cannot believe that the decision which you wish to bring
about and which I know only from your announcement will be a good one. I'm afraid
you misunderstand our Prince, the Court, and everything here.
 STEWARD: Whether understood or misunderstood, the present situation is
unbearable.
 CHAMBERLAIN: Unbearable it may be, but it is founded on the nature of
things as they are here, and we are prepared to bear it to the end.
 STEWARD: But not the Princess, not I, not those who are on our side.
 CHAMBERLAIN: What do you find so unbearable?
 STEWARD: Just because the decision is imminent I want to speak frankly. The
Prince has a dual nature. The one, concerning itself with government, wavers absentmindedly in public, disregarding its own privileges. The other nature admittedly
searches very painstakingly for a strengthening of its foundations. It searches for them
in the past, delving deeper and deeper. What a misunderstanding of the situation! A
misunderstanding that doesn't lack greatness -- although its defectiveness is even
greater than its appearance. Can you fail to see that?
 CHAMBERLAIN: It's not the description I object to, it's the interpretation.
 STEWARD: The interpretation? And to think that in the hope of getting you to
agree, I have judged the situation with more leniency than I actually feel! And I'm still
withholding my verdict in order to spare you. But just one thing: in reality the Prince
does not need a strengthening of his foundations. If he uses all the power at present at
Page 244
his disposal, he'll find it sufficient to bring about everything that the most extreme
responsibility before God and man may demand of him. But he shies away from the
balance of life, he's on his way to becoming a tyrant.
 CHAMBERLAIN: He with his modest character!
 STEWARD: It's the modesty of the one half, for he needs all his energy for the
second half which scrapes together the foundation needed to build something like the
Tower of Babel. To hinder this work should be the sole policy of all those who are
interested in their personal existence, in the principality, in the Princess, and possibly
even in the Prince.
 CHAMBERLAIN: "Possibly even" -- you're very candid. To be equally frank,
your candor makes me tremble at the imminent decision. And I regret, as I've recently
come to regret more and more, that I'm devoted to the Prince almost to the point of
helplessness.
 STEWARD: Everything is clear. You are not flirting with the opposition. In
fact, you are even holding out a hand. Only one, which is commendable for an old
courtier. And yet your only hope is that our great example carries you along.
 CHAMBERLAIN: Whatever I can do to prevent it, I shall do.
 STEWARD: It doesn't frighten me anymore. (Pointing to the Warden.) And you
who've been sitting there so quietly, have you understood everything that's been said?
 CHAMBERLAIN: The Warden of the tomb?
 STEWARD: The Warden of the tomb. One must probably be a stranger to size
him up. Isn't that so, old boy, you little old screech-owl, you! Have you ever seen him
flying through the forest in the evening, out of any gun's reach? But by day he ducks at
Page 245
the slightest move.
 CHAMBERLAIN: I don't understand.
 WARDEN (almost in tears): You're scolding me, sir, and I don't know why.
Please let me go home. I'm really not evil, I'm just the Warden of the tomb.
 CHAMBERLAIN: You mistrust him.
 STEWARD: Mistrust? No, he's too insignificant for that. But I want to keep an
eye on him. For I think -- call it whim or superstition, if you like -- that he's not just a
mere tool of evil, but an upright, active worker for evil.
 CHAMBERLAIN: He has been serving the Court quietly for thirty years --
possibly without ever having been in the castle.
 STEWARD: Oh, moles like him build long passages before they emerge.
(Suddenly turns to Warden.) But first of all, away with this one! (To servant) Take him
to the Friedrichspark, stay with him, and don't let him out until further notice.
 WARDEN (very frightened): I'm supposed to wait for his Highness, the Prince.
 STEWARD: An error. -- Off with you.
 CHAMBERLAIN: He must be treated with care. He's an old and sick man, and
for some reason the Prince sets store by him.
 WARDEN (bowing low before Chamberlain).
 STEWARD: What? (To servant) Treat him carefully, but for God's sake get him
out of here. Quick!
Page 246
 SERVANT (about to grab him).
 CHAMBERLAIN (stepping between them): No, we must get a carriage.
 STEWARD: It's the air at this Court. I can't taste a grain of salt anywhere. All
right then, a carriage. You take the treasure away in a carriage. But now, out of the
room with you both! (To Chamberlain) Your behavior shows me --
 WARDEN (collapses, with a little scream, on way to door).
 STEWARD (stamping his foot): Is it impossible to get rid of him? Pick him up
in your arms if there's no other way. Can't you understand what's expected of you!
 CHAMBERLAIN: The Prince!
 SERVANT (opening door at left).
 STEWARD: Ah! (Glances at Warden.) I should have known that ghosts cannot
be transported.
 PRINCE (enters with quick step, behind him the Princess, dark young woman
with teeth clenched, stops in doorway).
 PRINCE: What's happened?
 STEWARD: The Warden felt ill, I was about to have him taken away.
 PRINCE: I should have been notified. Has the doctor been sent for?
 CHAMBERLAIN: I'll have him called. (Hurries out by center door, returns at
once.)
Page 247
 PRINCE (kneeling beside Warden): Prepare a bed for him! Fetch a stretcher! Is
the doctor on his way? He's taking a long time. The pulse is very weak. I can't hear the
heart. These miserable ribs! How worn out this body is! (Stands up suddenly, fetches a
glass of water, stares about him.) One is so helpless. (Kneels down again, moistens the
Warden's face.) Now he's breathing better. It won't be so bad. Healthy stock, the kind
that doesn't give up, even in extremity. But the doctor, the doctor!
(While he glances toward the door, the Warden raises his hand and caresses the
Prince's cheek. Princess turns her head away, toward the window. Enter servants with
stretcher, Prince helps to lift Warden.)
 PRINCE: Handle him gently. Oh, you with your great claws! Lift his head a
little. Nearer the stretcher. The pillow further down his back. His arm! His arm! You're
all bad, bad nurses! I wonder if you'll ever be as tired as this man on the stretcher? --
There we are -- and now with slow -- slow -- steps. And above all, steadily. (Turning
in door to Princess.) Here then is the Warden of the tomb.
 PRINCESS (nods).
PRINCE: I had intended to show him to you differently. (After taking another
step.) Aren't you coming along?
 PRINCESS: I'm so tired.
 PRINCE: The moment I've talked to the doctor I'll come back. And you,
gentlemen, who wish to make your report, wait for me.
 STEWARD (to Princess): Does your Highness require my services?
 PRINCESS: Always. I am grateful for your vigilance. Do not abandon it, even if
today it was in vain. Everything is at stake. You see more than I. I am always in my
Page 248
rooms. But I know it will get more and more gloomy. This autumn is sad beyond
belief. 