Josephine the Singer,
or the Mouse Folk
 OUR SINGER is called Josephine. Anyone who has not heard her does not know
the power of song. There is no one but is carried away by her singing, a tribute all the
greater as we are not in general a music-loving race. Tranquil peace is the music we
love best; our life is hard, we are no longer able, even on occasions when we have tried
to shake off the cares of daily life, to rise to anything so high and remote from our
Page 386
usual routine as music. But we do not much lament that; we do not get even so far; a
certain practical cunning, which admittedly we stand greatly in need of, we hold to be
our greatest distinction, and with a smile born of such cunning we are wont to console
ourselves for all shortcomings, even supposing -- only it does not happen -- that we
were to yearn once in a way for the kind of bliss which music may provide. Josephine is
the sole exception; she has a love for music and knows too how to transmit it; she is
the only one; when she dies, music -- who knows for how long -- will vanish from our
lives.
 I have often thought about what this music of hers really means. For we are
quite unmusical; how is it that we understand Josephine's singing or, since Josephine
denies that, at least think we can understand it. The simplest answer would be that the
beauty of her singing is so great that even the most insensitive cannot be deaf to it, but
this answer is not satisfactory. If it were really so, her singing would have to give one
an immediate and lasting feeling of being something out of the ordinary, a feeling that
from her throat something is sounding which we have never heard before and which
we are not even capable of hearing, something that Josephine alone and no one else
can enable us to hear. But in my opinion that is just what does not happen, I do not
feel this and have never observed that others feel anything of the kind. Among
intimates we admit freely to one another that Josephine's singing, as singing, is
nothing out of the ordinary.
 Is it in fact singing at all? Although we are unmusical we have a tradition of
singing; in the old days our people did sing; this is mentioned in legends and some
songs have actually survived, which, it is true, no one can now sing. Thus we have an
inkling of what singing is, and Josephine's art does not really correspond to it. So is it
singing at all? Is it not perhaps just a piping? And piping is something we all know
about, it is the real artistic accomplishment of our people, or rather no mere
accomplishment but a characteristic expression of our life. We all pipe, but of course
no one dreams of making out that our piping is an art, we pipe without thinking of it,
Page 387
indeed without noticing it, and there are even many among us who are quite unaware
that piping is one of our characteristics. So if it were true that Josephine does not sing
but only pipes and perhaps, as it seems to me at least, hardly rises above the level of
our usual piping -- yet, perhaps her strength is not even quite equal to our usual
piping, whereas an ordinary farmhand can keep it up effortlessly all day long, besides
doing his work -- if that were all true, then indeed Josephine's alleged vocal skill might
be disproved, but that would merely clear the ground for the real riddle which needs
solving, the enormous influence she has.
 After all, it is only a kind of piping that she produces. If you post yourself quite
far away from her and listen, or, still better, put your judgment to the test, whenever
she happens to be singing along with others, by trying to identify her voice, you will
undoubtedly distinguish nothing but a quite ordinary piping tone, which at most
differs a little from the others through being delicate or weak. Yet if you sit down
before her, it is not merely a piping; to comprehend her art it is necessary not only to
hear but to see her. Even if hers were only our usual workaday piping, there is first of
all this peculiarity to consider, that here is someone making a ceremonial performance
out of doing the usual thing. To crack a nut is truly no feat, so no one would ever dare
to collect an audience in order to entertain it with nut-cracking. But if all the same one
does do that and succeeds in entertaining the public, then it cannot be a matter of
simple nut-cracking. Or it is a matter of nut-cracking, but it turns out that we have
overlooked the art of cracking nuts because we were too skilled in it and that this
newcomer to it first shows us its real nature, even finding it useful in making his
effects to be rather less expert in nut-cracking than most of us.
 Perhaps it is much the same with Josephine's singing; we admire in her what we
do not at all admire in ourselves; in this respect, I may say, she is of one mind with us. I
was once present when someone, as of course often happens, drew her attention to the
folk piping everywhere going on, making only a modest reference to it, yet for
Josephine that was more than enough. A smile so sarcastic and arrogant as she then
Page 388
assumed I have never seen; she, who in appearance is delicacy itself, conspicuously so
even among our people who are prolific in such feminine types, seemed at that
moment actually vulgar; she was at once aware of it herself, by the way, with her
extreme sensibility, and controlled herself. At any rate she denies any connection
between her art and ordinary piping. For those who are of the contrary opinion she
has only contempt and probably unacknowledged hatred. This is not simple vanity, for
the opposition, with which I too am half in sympathy, certainly admires her no less
than the crowd does, but Josephine does not want mere admiration, she wants to be
admired exactly in the way she prescribes, mere admiration leaves her cold. And when
you take a seat before her, you understand her; opposition is possible only at a
distance, when you sit before her, you know: this piping of hers is no piping.
 Since piping is one of our thoughtless habits, one might think that people
would pipe up in Josephine's audience too; her art makes us feel happy, and when we
are happy we pipe; but her audience never pipes, it sits in mouselike stillness; as if we
had become partakers in the peace we long for, from which our own piping at the very
least holds us back, we make no sound. Is it her singing that enchants us or is it not
rather the solemn stillness enclosing her frail little voice? Once it happened while
Josephine was singing that some silly little thing in all innocence began to pipe up too.
Now it was just the same as what we were hearing from Josephine; in front of us the
piping sound that despite all rehearsal was still tentative and here in the audience the
unselfconscious piping of a child; it would have been impossible to define the
difference; but yet at once we hissed and whistled the interrupter down, although it
would not really have been necessary, for in any case she would certainly have crawled
away in fear and shame, whereas Josephine struck up her most triumphal notes and
was quite beyond herself, spreading her arms wide and stretching her throat as high as
it could reach.
 That is what she is like always, every trifle, every casual incident, every
nuisance, a creaking in the parquet, a grinding of teeth, a failure in the lighting incites
Page 389
her to heighten the effectiveness of her song; she believes anyhow that she is singing to
deaf ears; there is no lack of enthusiasm and applause, but she has long learned not to
expect real understanding, as she conceives it. So all disturbance is very welcome to
her; whatever intervenes from outside to hinder the purity of her song, to be overcome
with a slight effort, even with no effort at all, merely by confronting it, can help to
awaken the masses, to teach them not perhaps understanding but awed respect.
 And if small events do her such service, how much more do great ones. Our life
is very uneasy, every day brings surprises, apprehensions, hopes, and terrors, so that it
would be impossible for a single individual to bear it all did he not always have by day
and night the support of his fellows; but even so it often becomes very difficult;
frequently as many as a thousand shoulders are trembling under a burden that was
really meant only for one pair. Then Josephine holds that her time has come. So there
she stands, the delicate creature, shaken by vibrations especially below the breastbone,
so that one feels anxious for her, it is as if she has concentrated all her strength on her
song, as if from everything in her that does not directly subserve her singing all
strength has been withdrawn, almost all power of life, as if she were laid bare,
abandoned, committed merely to the care of good angels, as if while she is so wholly
withdrawn and living only in her song a cold breath blowing upon her might kill her.
But just when she makes such an appearance, we who are supposed to be her
opponents are in the habit of saying: "She can't even pipe; she has to put such a terrible
strain on herself to force out not a song -- we can't call it song -- but some
approximation to our usual customary piping." So it seems to us, but this impression
although, as I said, inevitable is yet fleeting and transient. We too are soon sunk in the
feeling of the mass, which, warmly pressed body to body, listens with indrawn breath.
 And to gather around her this mass of our people who are almost always on the
run and scurrying hither and thither for reasons that are often not very clear,
Josephine mostly needs to do nothing else than take up her stand, head thrown back,
mouth half-open, eyes turned upwards, in the position that indicates her intention to
Page 390
sing. She can do this where she likes, it need not be a place visible a long way off, any
secluded corner pitched on in a moment's caprice will serve as well. The news that she
is going to sing flies around at once and soon whole processions are on the way there.
Now, sometimes, all the same, obstacles intervene, Josephine likes best to sing just
when things are most upset, many worries and dangers force us then to take devious
ways, with the best will in the world we cannot assemble ourselves as quickly as
Josephine wants, and on occasion she stands there in ceremonial state for quite a time
without a sufficient audience -- then indeed she turns furious, then she stamps her
feet, swearing in most unmaidenly fashion; she actually bites. But even such behavior
does no harm to her reputation; instead of curbing a little her excessive demands,
people exert themselves to meet them; messengers are sent out to summon fresh
hearers; she is kept in ignorance of the fact that this is being done; on the roads all
around sentries can be seen posted who wave on newcomers and urge them to hurry;
this goes on until at last a tolerably large audience is gathered.
 What drives the people to make such exertions for Josephine's sake? This is no
easier to answer than the first question about Josephine's singing, with which it is
closely connected. One could eliminate that and combine them both in the second
question, if it were possible to assert that because of her singing our people are
unconditionally devoted to Josephine. But this is simply not the case; unconditional
devotion is hardly known among us; ours are people who love slyness beyond
everything, without any malice, to be sure, and childish whispering and chatter,
innocent, superficial chatter, to be sure, but people of such a kind cannot go in for
unconditional devotion, and that Josephine herself certainly feels, that is what she is
fighting against with all the force of her feeble throat.
 In making such generalized pronouncements, of course, one should not go too
far, our people are all the same devoted to Josephine, only not unconditionally. For
instance, they would not be capable of laughing at Josephine. It can be admitted: in
Josephine there is much to make one laugh; and laughter for its own sake is never far
Page 391
away from us; in spite of all the misery of our lives quiet laughter is always, so to speak,
at our elbows; but we do not laugh at Josephine. Many a time I have had the
impression that our people interpret their relationship to Josephine in this way, that
she, this frail creature, needing protection and in some way remarkable, in her own
opinion remarkable for her gift of song, is entrusted to their care and they must look
after her; the reason for this is not clear to anyone, only the fact seems to be
established. But what is entrusted to one's care one does not laugh at; to laugh would
be a breach of duty; the utmost malice which the most malicious of us wreak on
Josephine is to say now and then: "The sight of Josephine is enough to make one stop
laughing."
 So the people look after Josephine much as a father takes into his care a child
whose little hand -- one cannot tell whether in appeal or command -- is stretched out
to him. One might think that our people are not fitted to exercise such paternal duties,
but in reality they discharge them, at least in this case, admirably; no single individual
could do what in this respect the people as a whole are capable of doing. To be sure,
the difference in strength between the people and the individual is so enormous that it
is enough for the nursling to be drawn into the warmth of their nearness and he is
sufficiently protected. To Josephine, certainly, one does not dare mention such ideas.
"Your protection isn't worth an old song," she says then. Sure, sure, old song, we think.
And besides her protest is no real contradiction, it is rather a thoroughly childish way
of doing, and childish gratitude, while a father's way of doing is to pay no attention to
it.
 Yet there is something else behind it which is not so easy to explain by this
relationship between the people and Josephine. Josephine, that is to say, thinks just the
opposite, she believes it is she who protects the people. When we are in a bad way
politically or economically, her singing is supposed to save us, nothing less than that,
and if it does not drive away the evil, at least gives us the strength to bear it. She does
not put it in these words or in any other, she says very little anyhow, she is silent
Page 392
among the chatterers, but it flashes from her eyes, on her closed lips -- few among us
can keep their lips closed, but she can -- it is plainly legible. Whenever we get bad
news -- and on many days bad news comes thick and fast at once, lies and half-truths
included -- she rises up at once, whereas usually she sits listlessly on the ground, she
rises up and stretches her neck and tries to see over the heads of her flock like a
shepherd before a thunderstorm. It is certainly a habit of children, in their wild,
impulsive fashion, to make such claims, but Josephine's are not quite so unfounded as
children's. True, she does not save us and she gives us no strength; it is easy to stage
oneself as a savior of our people, inured as they are to suffering, not sparing
themselves, swift in decision, well acquainted with death, timorous only to the eye in
the atmosphere of reckless daring which they constantly breathe, and as prolific
besides as they are bold -- it is easy, I say, to stage oneself after the event as the savior
of our people, who have always somehow managed to save themselves, although at the
cost of sacrifices which make historians -- generally speaking we ignore historical
research entirely -- quite horror-struck. And yet it is true that just in emergencies we
hearken better than at other times to Josephine's voice. The menaces that loom over
us make us quieter, more humble, more submissive to Josephine's domination; we like
to come together, we like to huddle close to each other, especially on an occasion set
apart from the troubles preoccupying us; it is as if we were drinking in all haste -- yes,
haste is necessary, Josephine too often forgets that -- from a cup of peace in common
before the battle, It is not so much a performance of songs as an assembly of the
people, and an assembly where except for the small piping voice in front there is
complete stillness; the hour is much too grave for us to waste it in chatter.
 A relationship of this kind, of course, would never content Josephine. Despite
all the nervous uneasiness that fills Josephine because her position has never been
quite defined, there is still much that she does not see, blinded by her self-conceit, and
she can be brought fairly easily to overlook much more, a swarm of flatterers is always
busy about her to this end, thus really doing a public service -- and yet to be only an
incidental, unnoticed performer in a corner of an assembly of the people, for that,
Page 393
although in itself it would be no small thing, she would certainly not make us the
sacrifice of her singing.
 Nor does she need to, for her art does not go unnoticed. Although we are at
bottom preoccupied with quite other things and it is by no means only for the sake of
her singing that stillness prevails and many a listener does not even look up but buries
his face in his neighbor's fur, so that Josephine up in front seems to be exerting herself
to no purpose, there is yet something -- it cannot be denied -- that irresistibly makes
its way into us from Josephine's piping. This piping, which rises up where everyone
else is pledged to silence, comes almost like a message from the whole people to each
individual; Josephine's thin piping amidst grave decisions is almost like our people's
precarious existence amidst the tumult of a hostile world. Josephine exerts herself, a
mere nothing in voice, a mere nothing in execution, she asserts herself and gets across
to us; it does us good to think of that. A really trained singer, if ever such a one should
be found among us, we could certainly not endure at such a time and we should
unanimously turn away from the senselessness of any such performance. May
Josephine be spared from perceiving that the mere fact of our listening to her is proof
that she is no singer. An intuition of it she must have, else why does she so
passionately deny that we do listen, only she keeps on singing and piping her intuition
away.
 But there are other things she could take comfort from: we do really listen to
her in a sense, probably much as one listens to a trained singer; she gets effects which a
trained singer would try in vain to achieve among us and which are only produced
precisely because her means are so inadequate. For this, doubtless, our way of life is
mainly responsible.
 Among our people there is no age of youth, scarcely the briefest childhood.
Regularly, it is true, demands are put forward that the children should be granted a
special freedom, a special protection, that their right to be a little carefree, to have a
Page 394
little senseless giddiness, a little play, that this right should be respected and the
exercise of it encouraged; such demands are put forward and nearly everyone approves
them, there is nothing one could approve more, but there is also nothing, in the reality
of our daily life, that is less likely to be granted, one approves these demands, one
makes attempts to meet them, but soon all the old ways are back again. Our life
happens to be such that a child, as soon as it can run about a little and a little
distinguish one thing from another, must look after itself just like an adult; the areas
on which, for economic reasons, we have to live in dispersion are too wide, our
enemies too numerous, the dangers lying everywhere in wait for us too incalculable --
we cannot shelter our children from the struggle for existence, if we did so, it would
bring them to an early grave. These depressing considerations are reinforced by
another, which is not depressing: the fertility of our race. One generation -- and each
is numerous -- treads on the heels of another, the children have no time to be
children. Other races may foster their children carefully, schools may be erected for
their little ones, out of these schools the children may come pouring daily, the future
of the race, yet among them it is always the same children that come out day after day
for a long time. We have no schools, but from our race come pouring at the briefest
intervals the innumerable swarms of our children, merrily lisping or chirping so long
as they cannot yet pipe, rolling or tumbling along by sheer impetus so long as they
cannot yet run, clumsily carrying everything before them by mass weight so long as
they cannot yet see, our children! And not the same children, as in those schools, no,
always new children again and again, without end, without a break, hardly does a child
appear than it is no more a child, while behind it new childish faces are already
crowding so fast and so thick that they are indistinguishable, rosy with happiness.
Truly, however delightful this may be and however much others may envy us for it,
and rightly, we simply cannot give a real childhood to our children. And that has its
consequences. A kind of unexpended, ineradicable childishness pervades our people;
in direct opposition to what is best in us, our infallible practical common sense, we
often behave with the utmost foolishness, with exactly the same foolishness as
children, senselessly, wastefully, grandiosely, irresponsibly, and all that often for the
Page 395
sake of some trivial amusement. And although our enjoyment of it cannot of course be
so wholehearted as a child's enjoyment, something of this survives in it without a
doubt. From this childishness of our people Josephine too has profited since the
beginning.
 Yet our people are not only childish, we are also in a sense prematurely old.
Childhood and old age come upon us not as upon others. We have no youth, we are all
at once grown-up, and then we stay grown-up too long, a certain weariness and
hopelessness spreading from that leaves a broad trail through our people's nature,
tough and strong in hope that it is in general, our lack of musical gifts has surely some
connection with this; we are too old for music, its excitement, its rapture do not suit
our heaviness, wearily we wave it away; we content ourselves with piping; a little
piping here and there, that is enough for us. Who knows, there may be talents for
music among us; but if there were, the character of our people would suppress them
before they could unfold. Josephine on the other hand can pipe as much as she will, or
sing or whatever she likes to call it, that does not disturb us, that suits us, that we can
well put up with; any music there may be in it is reduced to the least possible trace; a
certain tradition of music is preserved, yet without making the slightest demand upon
us.
 But our people, being what they are, get still more than this from Josephine. At
her concerts, especially in times of stress, it is only the very young who are interested
in her singing as singing, they alone gaze in astonishment as she purses her lips, expels
the air between her pretty front teeth, half dies in sheer wonderment at the sounds she
herself is producing and after such a swooning swells her performance to new and
more incredible heights, whereas the real mass of the people -- this is plain to see --
are quite withdrawn into themselves. Here in the brief intervals between their
struggles our people dream, it is as if the limbs of each were loosened, as if the harried
individual once in a while could relax and stretch himself at ease in the great, warm
bed of the community. And into these dreams Josephine's piping drops note by note;
Page 396
she calls it pearl-like, we call it staccato; but at any rate here it is in its right place, as
nowhere else, finding the moment wait for it as music scarcely ever does. Something
of our poor brief childhood is in it, something of lost happiness that can never be
found again, but also something of active daily life, of its small gaieties, unaccountable
and yet springing up and not to be obliterated. And indeed this is all expressed not in
full round tones but softly, in whispers, confidentially, sometimes a little hoarsely. Of
course it is a kind of piping. Why not? Piping is our people's daily speech, only many a
one pipes his whole life long and does not know it, where here piping is set free from
the fetters of daily life and it sets us free too for a little while. We certainly should not
want to do without these performances.
 But from that point it is a long, long way to Josephine's claim that she gives us
new strength and so on and so forth. For ordinary people, at least, not for her train of
flatterers. "What other explanation could there be?" -- they say with quite shameless
sauciness -- "how else could you explain the great audiences, especially when danger is
most imminent, which have even often enough hindered proper precautions being
taken in time to avert danger." Now, this last statement is unfortunately true, but can
hardly be counted as one of Josephine's titles to fame, especially considering that when
such large gatherings have been unexpectedly flushed by the enemy and many of our
people left lying for dead, Josephine, who was responsible for it all, and indeed perhaps
attracted the enemy by her piping, has always occupied the safest place and was always
the first to whisk away quietly and speedily under cover of her escort. Still, everyone
really knows that, and yet people keep running to whatever place Josephine decides on
next, at whatever time she rises up to sing. One could argue from this that Josephine
stands almost beyond the law, that she can do what she pleases, at the risk of actually
endangering the community, and will be forgiven for everything. If this were so, even
Josephine's claims would be entirely comprehensible, yes, in this freedom to be
allowed her, this extraordinary gift granted to her and to no one else in direct
contravention of the laws, one could see an admission of the fact that the people do
not understand Josephine, just as she alleges, that they marvel helplessly at her art, feel
Page 397
themselves unworthy of it, try to assuage the pity she rouses in them by making really
desperate sacrifices for her and, to the same extent that her art is beyond their
comprehension, consider her personality and her wishes to lie beyond their
jurisdiction. Well, that is simply not true at all, perhaps as individuals the people may
surrender too easily to Josephine, but as a whole they surrender unconditionally to no
one, and not to her either.
 For a long time back, perhaps since the very beginning of her artistic career,
Josephine has been fighting for exemption from all daily work on account of her
singing; she should be relieved of all responsibility for earning her daily bread and
being involved in the general struggle for existence, which -- apparently -- should be
transferred on her behalf to the people as a whole. A facile enthusiast -- and there have
been such -- might argue from the mere unusualness of this demand, from the
spiritual attitude needed to frame such a demand, that it has an inner justification. But
our people draw other conclusions and quietly refuse it. Nor do they trouble much
about disproving the assumptions on which it is based. Josephine argues, for instance,
that the strain of working is bad for her voice, that the strain of working is of course
nothing to the strain of singing, but it prevents her from being able to rest sufficiently
after singing and to recuperate for more singing, she has to exhaust her strength
completely and yet, in these circumstances, can never rise to the peak of her abilities.
The people listen to her arguments and pay no attention. Our people, so easily moved,
sometimes cannot be moved at all. Their refusal is sometimes so decided that even
Josephine is taken aback, she appears to submit, does her proper share of work, sings
as best she can, but all only for a time, then with renewed strength -- for this purpose
her strength seems inexhaustible -- she takes up the fight again.
 Now it is clear that what Josephine really wants is not what she puts into
words. She is honorable, she is not work-shy, shirking in any case is quite unknown
among us, if her petition were granted she would certainly live the same life as before,
her work would not at all get in the way of her singing nor would her singing grow any
Page 398
better -- what she wants is public, unambiguous, permanent recognition of her art,
going far beyond any precedent so far known. But while almost everything else seems
within her reach, this eludes her persistently. Perhaps she should have taken a
different line of attack from the beginning, perhaps she herself sees that her approach
was wrong, but now she cannot draw back, retreat would be self-betrayal, now she
must stand or fall by her petition.
 If she really had enemies, as she avers, they could get much amusement from
watching this struggle, without having to lift a finger. But she has no enemies, and
even though she is often criticized here and there, no one finds this struggle of hers
amusing. Just because of the fact that the people show themselves here in their cold,
judicial aspect, which is otherwise rarely seen among us. And however one may
approve it in this case, the very idea that such an aspect might be turned upon oneself
some day prevents amusement from breaking in. The important thing, both in the
people's refusal and in Josephine's petition, is not the action itself, but the fact that the
people are capable of presenting a stony, impenetrable front to one of their own, and
that it is all the more impenetrable because in other respects they show an anxious
paternal care, and more than paternal care, for this very member of the people.
 Suppose that instead of the people one had an individual to deal with: one
might imagine that this man had been giving in to Josephine all the time while nursing
a wild desire to put an end to his submissiveness one fine day; that he had made
superhuman sacrifices for Josephine in the firm belief that there was a natural limit to
his capacity for sacrifice; yes, that he had sacrificed more than was needful merely to
hasten the process, merely to spoil Josephine and encourage her to ask for more and
more until she did indeed reach the limit with this last petition of hers; and that he
then cut her off with a final refusal which was curt because long held in reserve. Now,
this is certainly not how the matter stands, the people have no need of such guile,
besides, their respect for Josephine is well tried and genuine, and Josephine's demands
are after all so far-reaching that any simple child could have told her what the
Page 399
outcome would be; yet it may be that such considerations enter into Josephine's way of
taking the matter and so add a certain bitterness to the pain of being refused.
 But whatever her ideas on the subject, she does not let them deter her from
pursuing the campaign. Recently she has even intensified her attack; hitherto she has
used only words as her weapons but now she is beginning to have recourse to other
means, which she thinks will prove more efficacious but which we think will run her
into greater dangers.
 Many believe that Josephine is becoming so insistent because she feels herself
growing old and her voice falling off, and so she thinks it high time to wage the last
battle for recognition. I do not believe it. Josephine would not be Josephine if that were
true. For her there is no growing old and no falling off in her voice. If she makes
demands it is not because of outward circumstances but because of an inner logic. She
reaches for the highest garland not because it is momentarily hanging a little lower but
because it is the highest; if she had any say in the matter she would have it still higher.
 This contempt for external difficulties, to be sure, does not hinder her from
using the most unworthy methods. Her rights seem beyond question to her; so what
does it matter how she secures them; especially since in this world, as she sees it,
honest methods are bound to fail. Perhaps that is why she has transferred the battle
for her rights from the field of song to another which she cares little about. Her
supporters have let it be known that, according to herself, she feels quite capable of
singing in such a way that all levels of the populace, even to the remotest corners of
the opposition, would find it a real delight, a real delight not by popular standards, for
the people affirm that they have always delighted in her singing, but a delight by her
own standards. However, she adds, since she cannot falsify the highest standards nor
pander to the lowest, her singing will have to stay as it is. But when it comes to her
campaign for exemption from work, we get a different story; it is of course also a
campaign on behalf of her singing, yet she is not fighting directly with the priceless
Page 400
weapon of her song, so any instrument she uses is good enough. Thus, for instance,
the rumor went around that Josephine meant to cut short her grace notes if her
petition were not granted. I know nothing about grace notes, and have never noticed
any in Josephine's singing. But Josephine is going to cut short her grace notes, not, for
the present, to cut them out entirely, only to cut them short. Presumably she has
carried out her threat, although I for one have observed no difference in her
performance. The people as a whole listened in the usual way without making any
pronouncement on the grace notes, nor did their response to her petition vary by a jot.
It must be admitted that Josephine's way of thinking, like her figure, is often very
charming. And so, for instance, after that performance, just as if her decision about the
grace notes had been too severe or too sudden a move against the people, she
announced that next time she would put in all the grace notes again. Yet after the next
concert she changed her mind once more, there was to be definitely an end of these
great arias with the grace notes, and until her petition was favorably regarded they
would never recur. Well, the people let all these announcements, decisions and
counterdecisions go in at one ear and out at the other, like a grown-up person deep in
thought turning a deaf ear to a child's babble, fundamentally well disposed but not
accessible.
 Josephine, however, does not give in. The other day, for instance, she claimed
that she had hurt her foot at work, so that it was difficult for her to stand up to sing;
but since she could not sing except standing up, her songs would now have to be cut
short. Although she limps and leans on her supporters, no one believes that she is
really hurt. Granted that her frail body is extra sensitive, she is yet one of us and we are
a race of workers; if we were to start limping every time we got a scratch, the whole
people would never be done limping. Yet though she lets herself be led about like a
cripple, though she shows herself in this pathetic condition oftener than usual, the
people all the same listen to her singing thankfully and appreciatively as before, but do
not bother much about the shortening of her songs.
Page 401
 Since she cannot very well go on limping forever, she thinks of something else,
she pleads that she is tired, not in the mood for singing, feeling faint. And so we get a
theatrical performance as well as a concert. We see Josephine's supporters in the
background begging and imploring her to sing. She would be glad to oblige, but she
cannot. They comfort and caress her with flatteries, they almost carry her to the
selected spot where she is supposed to sing. At last, bursting inexplicably into tears,
she gives way, but when she stands up to sing, obviously at the end of her resources,
weary, her arms not widespread as usual but hanging lifelessly down, so that one gets
the impression that they are perhaps a little too short -- just as she is about to strike
up, there, she cannot do it after all, an unwilling shake of the head tells us so and she
breaks down before our eyes. To be sure, she pulls herself together again and sings, I
fancy, much as usual; perhaps, if one has an ear for the finer shades of expression, one
can hear that she is singing with unusual feeling, which is, however, all to the good.
And in the end she is actually less tired than before, with a firm tread, if one can use
such a term for her tripping gait, she moves off, refusing all help from her supporters
and measuring with cold eyes the crowd which respectfully makes way for her.
 That happened a day or two ago; but the latest is that she has disappeared, just
at a time when she was supposed to sing. It is not only her supporters who are looking
for her, many are devoting themselves to the search, but all in vain; Josephine has
vanished, she will not sing; she will not even be cajoled into singing, this time she has
deserted us entirely.
 Curious, how mistaken she is in her calculations, the clever creature, so
mistaken that one might fancy she has made no calculations at all but is only being
driven on by her destiny, which in our world cannot be anything but a sad one. Of her
own accord she abandons her singing, of her own accord she destroys the power she
has gained over people's hearts. How could she ever have gained that power, since she
knows so little about these hearts of ours? She hides herself and does not sing, but our
people, quietly, without visible disappointment, a self-confident mass in perfect
Page 402
equilibrium, so constituted, even though appearances are misleading, that they can
only bestow gifts and not receive them, even from Josephine, our people continue on
their way.
 Josephine's road, however, must go downhill. The time will soon come when
her last notes sound and die into silence. She is a small episode in the eternal history of
our people, and the people will get over the loss of her. Not that it will be easy for us;
how can our gatherings take place in utter silence? Still, were they not silent even
when Josephine was present? Was her actual piping notably louder and more alive
than the memory of it will be? Was it even in her lifetime more than a simple memory?
Was it not rather because Josephine's singing was already past losing in this way that
our people in their wisdom prized it so highly?
 So perhaps we shall not miss so very much after all, while Josephine, redeemed
from the earthly sorrows which to her thinking lay in wait for all chosen spirits, will
happily lose herself in the numberless throng of the heroes of our people, and soon,
since we are no historians, will rise to the heights of redemption and be forgotten like
all her brothers. 